Support for in-place upgrade
============================

For all future versions of Sleeper, we intend to support upgrading a Sleeper instance in place without significant
disruption to the running instance. This is provided the instance is deployed with our standard CDK deployment code.

Our CDK deployment involves a large number of components, which communicate with each other in various formats, and is
backed by various layers of persistence. We also provide client code to interact with an instance of Sleeper.

Here are some changes we might want to make to Sleeper that could cause problems:

- Changes to communication or persistence formats, e.g. DynamoDB tables, SQS messages, JSON files, properties files, Arrow files
- Changes to how components join together, e.g. restructuring SQS queues, tracking mechanisms, temporary files in S3
- Changes to how clients communicate with Sleeper
- Changes to names of deployed resources
- Changes to CDK deployment that may trigger CloudFormation to recreate resources (e.g. EMR cluster)

We can look at some checks you can do before a release to make it less likely problems will occur.

### Communication and persistence formats

In general, all existing values in an instance should work, and all values generated by any process on the old version
during or after the deployment should work.

Bear in mind the old code will still be active for some time after the deployment. This includes:

- ECS tasks on the old version that may continue to run for hours
- EMR clusters with jobs queued with an old version of the jar
- Clients that may not be upgraded for some time

For example, compaction tasks and bulk import jobs will continue to submit state store commits to SQS, and large
transactions to S3, with the old version of the code.

#### Format changes

For every JSON format, every properties file, every DynamoDB table, and for binary formats e.g. Arrow files, ensure that
any change does not:

- Remove any pre-existing fields
- Stop populating any pre-existing fields
- Rename any pre-existing fields
- Change any existing structure
- Change the behaviour of existing fields

For the values serialised in a format, ensure that all previously supported values will still result in the expected
behaviour after an upgrade. For example, if there's an enum, we should not remove any enum values, because there may be
serialised instances of this stored in an instance.

For every field we've added, ensure that functionality will be unaffected if that field is missing. Expect the system
and its clients to continue to emit values that do not contain that field during the deployment and for hours
afterwards.

Ensure that unit test coverage is still present for support for the format as it was before any change.

This includes all SQS messages, all JSON files held in S3, all JSON data held in DynamoDB tables.

#### Renaming/removing configuration properties

If instance/table properties are renamed, the old name should still work.

If properties need to be removed, they should be first documented as deprecated, with an explanation of why and
recommendations for how to proceed. Deprecated properties should be retained for a significant period. When a property
is removed, the system should continue to behave as the user would expect. Nothing should fail because a property has
been removed. Ideally the property should still be recognised so the user can be informed of what happened.

At time of writing we don't have specific mechanisms to manage these changes. When we deprecate a property we can just
state in the property description. If we want to rename any properties we'll need to add a mechanism to support the old
name as an alias.

#### Default values

If we want to change the default value of a property or JSON field, we need to make sure this will not produce
unexpected behaviour if the user has an instance deployed with this property unset. For example, if we want to change
the default state store implementation, we would need some handling to remember what the default implementation was when
a table was created. If we didn't do that, existing tables would suddenly forget their table state, because there's no
state stored in the new implementation type.

We can distinguish between external formats and internal formats. Usually internal formats should not use default
values, so that once the data has been created its behaviour will not change. This is particularly relevant for internal
SQS messages. For external formats where data is supplied by the user, it can be more practical to use defaults.

#### DynamoDB schemas

DynamoDB tables have a partially defined schema, in the sense that they have a partition key and sort key which are
defined when the table is created. We will not be able to change this aspect of the table definition.

We also need to treat the tables has having an implied schema. We need to maintain support for all existing data
held in a table. Because different components are deployed in parallel, we also need to assume that old processes will
continue to run and read from and write to the table. That means that any new data needs to be readable by old
processes, as well as old data readable by new processes.
